Data-Ink Ratio Analysis
2005
@author Paco Nathan <ceteri@gmail.com>
used for Bridge-Quest team in SPb

See: Edward R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Data,
Graphics Press, 1983, pp. 91-105.
http://www.edwardtufte.com/tufte/books_vdqi
http://www.infovis-wiki.net/index.php/Data-Ink_Ratio


	- Step 1 -

Use a screen capture tool to grab the image for some part of a GUI
that you wish to analyze for "Data-Ink Ratio".

In the example here, there is an screen capture file at:

   UserPreferences_1.png

Be sure to deselect any text or menu items, before the screen capture.
Otherwise those elements may have inverted colors later, such as white
on black.

It is best to save the image as a simple image file: PNG, GIF, BMP


	- Step 2 -

Convert the image into mostly "black and white".  However, simply
converting to B&W may cause too much distortion.  It is best to use an
image editing tool to:

   * decrease the saturation
   * increase the contrast

...until the image appears monochromatic.  The analysis tool uses a
histogram, so background colors or "feathering" (sometimes called "3D"
GUI components) will not affect the metric.

In the example here, there is a converted image file at:

   UserPreferences_2.png


	- Step 3 -

Use an image editing tool to erase all of the "data" elements from the
image.

In the example here, there is an image file with the data erased at:

   UserPreferences_3.png


	- Step 4 -

Use an image editing tool to erase all of the "label" elements from
the image.

In the example here, there is an image file with the data erased at:

   UserPreferences_4.png


	- Step 5 -

Use a Java compiler to run the analysis tool:

   javac DataInk.java
   java DataInk UserPreferences_2.png
   java DataInk UserPreferences_3.png
   java DataInk UserPreferences_4.png


	- Step 6 -

Copy and paste the analysis table for each image into an Excel
spreadsheet.

It is best to use the "Edit / Paste Special... / As Text" option,
otherwise Excel may not allow the table data to be pasted directly
into a spreadsheet.

In the example here, there is a spreadsheet document at:

   data-ink.xls

Then use the spreadsheet to calculate measurements for the Data-Ink
Ratio, as shown in the example.

It will be necessary to decided where in the RGB continuum to
distinguish between "white" pixels and "black" pixels.  In the example
here, the value 0x7FFFFF is chosen (middle gray) as the boundary for
colors called "black".

Since too much emphasis on data labels can confuse a UI design, it is
important to calculate metrics for both cases:

   * "ink" - "data"
   * "ink" - ("data" + "label")
